# Principal Component Analysis performed in order to forecast electricity prices

  Off lately, we have observed energy markets undergoing a dynamic transformation, which have changes in the generation structure and the creation of new trading opportunities. Ever since the competitive power exchange was established, a growing share of electricity was traded in day-ahead markets, where offers are place pre noon of the day preceding the delivery. Many market participants find the operations in such a complex environment challenging, since it requires taking various operational decisions on how to structure the intraday trade for example. Hence, an accurate prediction of electricity price is of major importance to the utility managers.


  Typically, the day-ahead electricity price forecasting studies focus on developing model structures that better represent the temporal, inter variable dependencies, input variable selection and finding optimal weights for combined forecasts. But not many studies in the electricity price forecasting try to find the average forecasts obtained models which are estimated from different windows or find the optimal calibration length. Some researchers argue that forecasting performance is sensitive to the calibration window choice, and it might be better to combine forecasts of different lengths, in the presence of structural breaks. Shorter windows often adopt better to changes and longer windows often lead to a more precise estimation of model parameters. Therefore, forecasts obtained from different windows will address distinct features of the underlying process.


  Principle component analysis (PCA) is a dimensionality reduction method that is often used to reduce the dimensionality of large datasets by transforming a large set of variables into a smaller one that still contains most of the information in the larger set. Reducing the number of variables of a dataset naturally has its disadvantages in terms of accuracy, but advantage is the simplicity due to dimensionality reduction. Due to this, smaller dataset is easier to explore and visualize. Various literatures have reported that the electricity price forecasting using PCA have resulted in more accurate short and midterm forecasts, due to the joint exploration of the forecast panel. The PCA approach could be also used to combine forecasts obtained from different models or/and model specifications. The PCA method have been extensively used and it has been successful for modelling large panels of data.


  While some authors try to develop weighting schemes that are optimal, the general conclusion from these studies is that it is hard to outperform and simple arithmetic average across all windows. One can argue that in the context of electricity markets, where the time series of interest (prices, loads) are characterized by weekly and annual seasonal behaviour, that there might be other better alternatives. We try to show in our study, averaging across a few short (e.g., 28, 56 and 84 days) and a few long (e.g., 714, 721 and 728 days) window lengths that it might bring/not, significant accuracy gains.


  In our study, for the given dataset i.e., GEFCOM, we present the various forecasting such as single calibration window (Win), simple average window (AW), weighted average window (WAW), expanding weighted average window (WAW)exp, PCA forecast combination approach and different calibration window lengths, using an autoregressive model (ARX) to predict the day ahead prices. The aim of our project is to compare the performance of the PCA to the performance of other forecasting models for various calibration window length and chose the model that produces the best prediction for the given dataset.
